# Investigating-the-Trend-of-Vibrio-Parahaemolyticus-in-California

The bacterium Vibrio parahaemolyticus (Vp) is a major cause of illness through the consumption of raw oysters. Vp has been consistently identified in the Gulf Coast and Pacific Northwest waters leading to concern regarding California waters. To better understand variation of Vp in California waters, concentration of Vp was measured in oyster samples taken across five shellfish farming locations between 2007 to 2020. Also measured were pathogenic genes, thermostable direct hemolysis (tdh) and thermostable direct-related hemolysin (trh), that some Vp carry. In addition, environmental variables such as seawater temperature and seawater salinity were introduced to measure their relationship with Vp. The objectives of this study are to investigate differences in Vp between five different shellfish farming locations across California, to investigate Vp trends by year and season, and to investigate the relationship between Vp and environmental variables. The Kruskal Wallis Test and pairwise permutation test determined Agua Hedionda, located in San Diego County, has the highest levels of Vp concentration, the highest Vp detection rate, and the highest seawater temperatures. Cubic spline models found no trend by year for Vp concentration, but did find they peak during late Summer and early Fall. There is an increase in trh detection during Summer and Fall but not for tdh. Classification models discovered there is a positive relationship between seawater temperature with both Vp concentration and detection. Seawater temperature is the best predictor of Vp, but higher temperatures does not result in a high probability of trh and tdh detects. This work is meant to improve the understanding of Vp in California waters and lay the foundation for future studies.
